# How to build the HTML manuals from source using a container to build the documentation

## Requirements

The OmegaT project provides a Gradle configuration to build the manuals using a container execution environment.

Theoretically, all the OCI-compatible container execution environments are supported. We tested both the Apache 2.0 licensed [containerd and nerdctl](https://github.com/containerd/nerdctl) and the non-free [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop), sold by Docker Inc.

OmegaT supports both `nerdctl` and `docker` command. If the `nerdctl` or `docker` commands are not in your path, all the documentation generation tasks will be skipped.

### Container runtimes

The standards and FLOSS communities have provided users with a powerful set of container execution tools:

- Runtime environment: containerd, kubernetes
- Toolset: nerdctl, podman
- Integrated environment: Rancher Desktop

### Rancher Desktop

Rancher Desktop is an Electron-based application that wraps other tools while providing a simple user experience.

- [Rancher Desktop](https://rancherdesktop.io/)

#### on macOS

On macOS, Rancher Desktop uses a virtual machine to run `containerd`. It also provides custom Lima machines with `nerdctl`.

Lima project provides Linux virtual machines for macOS, with built-in integration for `nerdctl`. There is an alternative project called `colima` (container for Linux on Mac) that provides container runtimes on macOS with minimal setup.

Rancher desktop supports both intel mac and arm mac.

- [colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima)

#### on Windows

Rancher Desktop uses `containerd` on WSL2 and `nerdctl` on Windows.

#### on Linux

Rancher Desktop has requirements that are detailed [here](https://docs.rancherdesktop.io/getting-started/installation/#linux).

### containerd/nerdctl and rootless mode on Linux

The OmegaT build system supports working in rootless mode.

#### Installation

Download the release files from [the project](https://github.com/containerd/nerdctl/releases).

```
bash
tar Cxzvvf /usr/local nerdctl-full-1.7.2-linux-amd64.tar.gz
```

And follow the instructions found [here](https://github.com/containerd/nerdctl/blob/main/docs/rootless.md)

### Generating the documentation

Make sure the container execution environment is running before launching the building task.

#### generating the First Steps page (OmegaT 6.0 and later)

OmegaT 6.0 and later display a "First Steps" page in the Editor pane at launch. That page is built with the following command:

```
bash
$ ./gradlew firstSteps
```

The generated pages will be found in `build/docs/greetings/<lang>/`.

#### generating the HTML manuals and the available language index page

The HTML manuals and the available language index page are built with the following command:

```
bash
$ ./gradlew updateManuals
```

The manuals are found in `build/docs/manual/`. The available languages index page is at `build/docs/manual/index.html`.

#### generating the Instant Start Guides (OmegaT 5.7 and before)

OmegaT 5.7 and before display an "Instant Start" page in the Editor pane at launch. That page is built with the following command:

```
bash
$ ./gradlew instantStartGuides
```

The generated pages will be found in `build/docs/greetings/<lang>/`.

## Under the hood

Document generation is done with the `ant` build configuration in the `docgen` container image.
`doc_src/docgen` is a shell script that is launched from the Gradle build system.
Arguments to `docgen` are the same as the arguments to `ant` described below.

See also:

- [docgen-docker](https://github.com/omegat-org/docgen-docker): source for the docgen container
