# Release Procedure

## 0. Decide a release version

See [Versioning](05.Versioning.md) for details about a versioning scheme.

## 1. Pre-announce on an omegat-dev mailing list

Especially if there is new translatable material, give the L10N team some lead
time to update translations. It is better to announce the due date
at the start of the release engineering, Step 3, instead of the planned
release date.

email template:

```text
Subject: release plan for OmegaT 6.x

Hi all.

The planed changes for releasing 6.x are now all merged,
and latest weekly release looks good for the general release.
 
We are now starting the release process.
Please check a latest release procedure at 
https://omegat.readthedocs.io/en/latest/90.ReleaseProcedure/

Due dates will be as follows:

- Feature freeze: today

- Documentation updating phase
    - Manual content freeze:  14, Dec.
    - UI Localisation freeze: 20, Dec.
    - Manual localisation freeze: 20, Dec.

- Update JRE versions to up-to-date: 20, Dec.

- Last weekly release for the candidate: 21, Dec.

- Check and confirmation
    - Ask confirmation for the latest weekly as the genral release 

- Release build and announce: 24, Dec.
    - git tag the source
    - trigger CI/CD for the release
    - Update web site download links
    - Send announce to users ML.

```

## 2. Choose the bundled JREs and update their major versions

See if an update is available for the bundled JREs,
and update `ci/azure-pipelines/release_steps.yml` if necessary.

If you change a bundled JREs version, you must also change `build.gradle`
which contain the corresponding file names.

For example

```groovy
// Definition of bundled JRE file names
def assetDir = findProperty('assetDir') ?: '../'
def macJRE = fileTree(dir: assetDir, include: 'OpenJDK17U-jre_x64_mac_*.tar.gz')
def armMacJRE = fileTree(dir: assetDir, include: 'OpenJDK17U-jre_aarch64_mac_*.tar.gz')
def linux64JRE = fileTree(dir: assetDir, include: 'OpenJDK17U-jre_x64_linux_*.tar.gz')
def linuxArm64JRE = fileTree(dir: assetDir, include: 'OpenJDK17U-jre_aarch64_linux_*.tar.gz')
def windowsJRE32 = fileTree(dir: assetDir, include: 'OpenJDK17U-jre_x86-32_windows_*.zip')
def windowsJRE = fileTree(dir: assetDir, include: 'OpenJDK17U-jre_x64_windows_*.zip')
```

If you want to bundle the Java 21 Long Term Support JRE, you need to change
`OpenJDK11U` to `OpenJDK21U`.

## 3. Check manual versions

There is a version definition in `doc_src/(lang)/version_(lang).properties`
files in each language folder.
Check whether it matches the `vernb` variable in `doc_src/(lang)/manualvariables.mod`.

Exercise caution, because it is currently not unified and its parity is not checked.

## 4. Test and integration test

Ensure that `./gradlew check` completes successfully.

Also ensure integration test completes successfully. See [34.IntegrationTest] for details.

```console
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml build
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml up --abort-on-container-exit
docker-compose down
```

These tests are done in Weekly Release build CI/CD scripts.
Please check the latest weekly build succeed.

## 5. Update files with the release version

###  `/src/org/omegat/Version.properties`

It should have already had a major and minor version numbers
that we expect for.

The Development version may have "_Beta" and you may need to
update (remove) it according to the step-0 decision of a version number.

### `/release/changes.txt`

You should update two parts.

   - Version header (including date!)
   - "[current] vs [previous]" line

and then commit the change.

```shell
git add src/org/omegat/Version.properties
git add release/changes.txt
git commit -sm 'Release version x.x'
```

## 6. Tag release revision

```sh
git tag vX.Y.Z
```

## 7. push commits and tags 

When you are working on a release process of version 6.0 and later versions, 
the release pipeline will be automatically run on Azure DevOps when you push
tag on GitHub.

```sh
git push origin vX.Y.Z
```

## 8. Add signature to Windows distribution files locally, and publish.

First, you should download published non-signed windows binaries from
source forge.

Second, you should prepare your certification PEM file provided by 
CA company, such as Comodo, and Certum.

There are two ways to sign the executable depends on what OS
you use. Please select A or B.


### A. Signing code on linux

Insert your hardware security module (HSM) USB dongle into the PC.
Prepare the shell script to sign executables that will be like as follows;

```bash
#!/bin/sh
infilie=$1
outfile=$2
toolexe=osslsigncode

engine=/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/engines-3/pkcs11.so
module=/opt/proCertumCardManager/sc30pkcs11-3.0.6.68-MS.so
# module=/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/engines-3/pkcs11.so

signer="Open Source Developer, Hiroshi Miura"
certs=cert/25044ce4fc92c7b98fcafdd60f46c724.pem

## execution
$toolexe sign -pkcs11engine $engine -pkcs11module $module -h sha256 -t http://time.certum.pl -certs $certs -askpass -n "${signer}" -in $infile -out $outfile
```

You will need to change the `module` line to use the path of
the driver SO file you have downloaded from the CA provider.
Similarly, update the `certs` line with the path to your PEM file.

After that, run the following command:

```bash
sign.sh OmegaT_6.1.0_Beta_Windows_Without_JRE.exe OmegaT_6.1.0_Beta_Windows_Without_JRE_Signed.exe
```

There are three files to sign, the `_Without_JRE`, `_Windows` and `_Windows_64` variants.

### B. Signing code on Windows

First, install Windows SDK from [Windows Dev center](https://developer.microsoft.
com/en-us/windows/downloads/windows-sdk/). All operations performed with Code Signing require a connected reader 
together with a card that contains a Code Signing certificate.

To sign the file, use the following command on the command line (cmd.exe):
```commandline
signtool sign /n "[1]" /t [2] /fd [3] /v [4]
```

- [1] Name or part of the name of the certificate's owner,
which can be checked in the system tool certmg.msc
- [2] Timestamp URL Address. When use Certum http://time.certum.pl
        For comodo http://timestamp.comodoca.com
- [3] The name of the signature algorithm. Available sha1 and sha256,
- [4] The path to the file to be signed.

A file is updated with signature. You should keep an original file for backup.

## 9. Build a notarized macOS distribution file locally, and publish

First, make sure the local JRE is up-to-date.

Sign and submit binary to Apple:

```sh
./gradlew macNotarize
```

When the confirmation email arrives, do:

```sh
./gradlew macStapledNotarizedDistZip
```

Publish to SourceForge Files.


## 10. Set default downloads

1. Go to [SourceForge Files](https://sourceforge.net/projects/omegat/files/)
2. Navigate to the directory for this release
3. For each platform: click the ⓘ button on the representative download for the
   platform
4. Select the radio button for the platform under the Default Download For label
5. Click Save


## 11. Publish the manual and Javadoc

```sh
./gradlew publishManual publishJavadoc
```


## 14. Publish to Maven Central

```sh
./gradlew publish
```

Then log onto [Sonatype Nexus](https://s01.oss.sonatype.org/) and publish the
release.

## 12. Modify the website

Some releases will impact the website structure. Make sure the website is up to date.

## 13. Verify all the user facing links

- Official site: [omegat.org](https://omegat.org)
- Documentation site: [omegat-standard](https://omegat.sourceforge.io/manual-standard/)
- JavaDoc site: [OmegaT API](https://omegat.sourceforge.io/javadoc-standard/)
- Sourceforge site: [files section](https://sourceforge.net/projects/omegat/files/)

## 14. Announce to News, user group

- [OmegaT News](https://sourceforge.net/p/omegat/news/)
  - [Example](https://sourceforge.net/p/omegat/news/2019/11/omegat-latest-version-510-released/)
- [User Group](https://omegat.org/support)
  - [Example](https://sourceforge.net/p/omegat/mailman/omegat-users/thread/CAHvKJZsm4ZSOmvCOpfbtss0z9uo0z7q--bDowRkyAQ5e2zNJJg%40.../#msg36855627)


## 15. Push a new version for version check

If no catastrophic problems are reported with the new version, once the
[website](https://github.com/omegat-org/omegat-website/) has been updated, bump
the version check master file:

```sh
./gradlew publishVersion
```

Consider opening a ticket on the website to coordinate timing.

## 16. Cleanup

- Bump version in `Version.properties`, `changes.txt`
- Set fixed bug tickets and implemented RFEs to `closed-fixed`
- Update ticket milestones if necessary

Note: Don't "clean up" old releases by moving them out of the way. It is
important that the distfile URLs remain stable.
