# Source tree of OmegaT project

This section describes a source tree and each folders' roles.

## main source code

There are three main source code, one is source code, others are test codes.

`src`

:   `src` is a main folder where OmegaT source code is stored.

    There are three sub folders under `src`.
    - `org`: main source code.
    - `schemas`: XML schemas for JAXB code generation.
    - `gen`: generated source code by JAXB jxc command.

`test`

:   `test` is a test folder where unit and regression test is stored. There are
two sub folders under `test`. one is `data` and other is `src`.

`test-integration`

:   `test-integration` is a folder for an integration test. There are two sub
folders under `test-integration`.

    `docker` has `Dockerfile` for test server and client environment to help
    developer to run the test automation.


## documentations

`doc_src`

:   `doc_src` is a home folder for manuals, and start guide.

`docs_devel`

:   `docs_devel` is a place for developer notes that you read now. These are
written by Markdown and the developer note can be converted into html
using MkDocs document processing system.

`docs`

:   There are manuals in the folder that is generated from document source
in the `doc_src` folder. A content here is updated by project manager,
document/localization administrator or lead developer.

    Packaging script copy all the contents here into distribution package.
    When user click `help->user manual` menu, browser will be open with
    contents here.

## sub modules code

`tipoftheday`

:   `tipoftheday` folder is a place of one of subprojects of OmegaT. This provides
a feature of "Tip of the Day" startup screen as an OmegaT plugin. There is subproject
`build.gradle` file under the folder and most configuration is in it.

    A source tree is placed under Maven standard.

    Contents which are displayed on "Tip of the Day" dialog is defined in `docs` folder.
    When you add new contents in it, you also requires update `tips.yaml` index file. 


## additional materials

`scripts`

:   You can find several user defined scripts  in `scripts` folder. These scripts are
installed in the `scripts` folder in installation system directory.


`release`

:   There are several important document file here. `changes.txt` has a change log 
of versions. `readme_*.txt` is a localized readme files. `libraries.txt` hold license
information about dependencies.

    There are also `*-specific` folders that is used when building installer or
    distribution packages.

`lib`

:   `license` subfolder hold raw license texts of dependencies libraries.

    When you download source package and extract zip file, you will find a folder
    `provided` which has all the dependencies jar files.
    When the folder provided exist, OmegaT can be built without downloading dependencies
    from the internet.
    This is to guarantee users to get all necessary materials even when one of dependency
    stop a distribution of its version.

`images`

:   There are logo images that is used for OS menu icons and window UI decorations.

`gradle`

:   There are files used by `Gradle` build system.


## CI/CD and quality assurance configs

`config`

:   It is a folder where `checkstyle` configuration file is stored. When launch
`./gradlew checkstyleJava verification command, the config file is used in a process.

`ci`

:   It is a folder where CI/CD scripts are stored.


## dot files and folders

`.github`

:   `.github` is a folder that has configurations for GitHub service.

`.docker-compose.yml`

:   It is a configuration file when developer run an integration-test
in the automated way.

`.readthedocs.yaml`

:   It is a configuration file for readthedocs.org service how to build developer
note on it.

`Plugins.properties`

:   It defines an **internal** plugins which source is inside main source tree.
plugin metadata will be generated automatically in artifacts `MANIFEST.MF` file.

`local.properties.sample`

:   This is a sample file of `local.properties` that is required for maintainer
to define a signature key and passphrase, account of publish site and related.

