# manifest

There must be a manifest file that indicates that it is an OmegaT plugin. There are two flavors, see below.

OmegaT 5.8.0 can install a plugin file (jar or zip) from GUI, that has mandatory information.
You **should** provide name, version, author, category, and description.

OmegaT 6.1.0 is going to be able to install plugins from remote.
In order to support remote installation, You **should** provide all requested information.
The manifest should be **a form of OmegaT 3.0.1 and up compliant**.

For each there are different manifest entry alternatives, and OmegaT will pick the first one present in the order from
left to right as described in the table below:

| Attribute   | Manifest entry (pick one)                              |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Name        | Plugin-Name, Bundle-Name, Implementation-Title         |
| Version     | Plugin-Version, Bundle-Version, Implementation-Version |
| Author      | Plugin-Author, Implementation-Vendor, Built-By         |
| Description | Plugin-Description                                     |
| Link        | Plugin-Link                                            |
| License     | Plugin-License                                         |
| Category    | Plugin-Category                                        |

## plugins for OmegaT 5.8.0 and up

### Simple plugin that has a single plugin category

A plugin should be declared in main section of `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF`:

    Plugin-Name: …
    Plugin-Version: x.y.z
    Plugin-Author: …
    Plugin-Description: …
    [Plugin-Link: https://..]
    Plugin-Category: filter
    OmegaT-Plugins: <classname>

where classname is the fully qualified classname of the plugin's initialization class.

### Complex plugin that has multiple drivers in plugin

    Plugin-Name: …
    Plugin-Version: x.y.z
    Plugin-Author: …
    [Plugin-Link: https://..]
    OmegaT-Plugins: <classnames>

    name: org/example/plugin/filter/package/
    Plugin-Description: ...
    Plugin-Category: filter

    name: org.example.plugin.filter.package.ClassName
    Plugin-Description: ...
    Plugin-Category: filter

Multiple classnames are defined, like in “Class-Path” attribute, i.e., space separated.
There are also several section that specified a details of each plugin classes.
The package section can be used for specifying category and description for classes in the package.
The classname section can be used for specifying category and description for the class.
These are useful when you bundles multiple filters/drivers in the plugin, such as OKAPI filter plugin.

### Mandatory method in the plugin class 

The plugin class should contain the following methods:

    public static void loadPlugins() {}
    public static void unloadPlugins() {}

The `loadPlugins()` method is executed on application startup before any GUI initialization. You can register your
plugin using Core APIs. Please be consult with [Loading Plugins](17.LoadingPlugins.md) and
[Core Events](22.CoreEvents.md).

## Plugin categories

Plugin manifest has a mandatory entry `Plugin-Category`:

    [Plugin-Category: filter]

You can choose a value from following list. A value is not affected the plugin behavior
but it is used when showing a plugin list on preference dialog.

1. filter
2. tokenizer
3. marker
4. machinetranslator
5. base
6. glossary
7. dictionary
8. theme
9. miscellaneous

When plugin has a value other than above, OmegaT will show it as 'unknown' category.

## Backward compatibility

OmegaT also accept old plugins in version 5.8.0 and onward.
It is not recommended to use old interfaces in new version of your plugins.

Omegat 5.3.0 also supports to provide additional information (valid for both flavors) that can be displayed in the UI.
You can **optionally** provide name, version, author and description.

OmegaT 5.5.0 can show the plugin name and author in Preferences. You are recommended to set these parameters.
You can **optionally** provide an URL of your plugin home page, license and category.

### plugins for OmegaT 2.1.3 and up
A plugin should be declared in `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF`:

    OmegaT-Plugin: true
    [Plugin-Name: …]
    [Plugin-Version: x.y.z]
    [Plugin-Author: …]
    [Plugin-Description: …]
    
    Name: my.Class
    OmegaT-Plugin: filter
    
    [Name: my.optional.other.Class
    OmegaT-Plugin: filter]

### plugins for OmegaT 3.0.1 and up
A plugin should be declared in `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF`:

    [Plugin-Name: …]
    [Plugin-Version: x.y.z]
    [Plugin-Author: …]
    [Plugin-Description: …]
    [Plugin-Link: https://..]
    [Plugin-Category: filter]
    OmegaT-Plugins: <classname>

