# Test and coverage

We have unit tests, regression tests, and feature tests for quality assurance.

## Directory structure

We have tests under `test/` directory. There are several test data
in `test/data/` directory.
There are two type of tests.

1. Unit tests
2. Linting tests

## Test coverage

OmegaT project prepare JaCoCo test suite to check test coverage.

When you use IDE such as IntelliJ IDEA or Eclipse, please access Gradle task menu
from `verification` group to launch `jacocoTestReport` task.
Otherwise, you can run it from terminal `./gradlew jacocoTestReport`

A test report will be appeared in `build/reports/jacoco/html/index.html` and
you can examine the result on your web browser.

## SpotBugs static analysis tool

You are recommend to check your code with SpotBugs static analysis tool.
We check it on CI/CD environment for every commit.
We treat all SpotBugs issues as error.

You should fix all the SpotBugs errors before posting the patch to core team.
When you push a GitHub Pull-Request, we always check unit tests and spotbugs test.

You can run spotbugs through `verification` task group of IDE's Gradle tasks menu
and click `SpotbugsMain`.
Otherwise, you can run it on terminal `./gradlew spotbugsMain`

A test result will be appeared in `build/reports/spotbugs/main.html`.

## Unit tests

You are recommended to write unit tests when you modify or add features anywhere in OmegaT code.
Test codes are organized in several sections/packages.

- core
- filters
- gui
- languagetools
- tokenizer
- util

### TestCore and TestCoreInitializer

There are two core test classes to perform headless test cases.

#### TestCore class

`TestCore` class provide a `setUpCore` method to setup temporal omegat configuration and
dummy GUI parts such as dummy main window, dummy menu items and dummy editor panes.

Test writer can inherit `TestCore` class and then concentrate to write actual cases.

### GUI tests

Unit test for GUI is a bit difficult to write.
Many test cases use ``SwingUtilities#invokeAndWait`` to change or get GUI properties.
Then it assert its value.

### Filter tests

Filter writer are strongly recommended to write tests with variety of source files.
You are also recommended to write tests with variety of options combinations.

## Linting tests

There are linting test cases under ``test/src/svn/`` directory, where the name
come from histrical reason, our project managed the code on subversion repository
from the start year 2002 to 2015.

We have three type of tests.

|    Test class | Note                                             |
|--------------:|:-------------------------------------------------|
|    BundleTest | Check Bundle*.properties and shortcut properties |
| CopyrightTest | Check copyright header                           |
|   PluginsTest | Check plugin properties integrity                |

