# Code signing how-to

## What and why code signing is required?

### Windows

Code signing provides a benefits to application security features
like Windows Defender Application Control (WDAC).
It allows the system to cryptographically verify that a file hasn't 
been tampered with before any code is to run.

Windows doesn't require software developers to digitally sign their code.
Users can install when user allows running application from other than
Microsoft Store.
When code sign is amendment, Windows may reduce warning when running.

### macOS

Code signing your app assures users that it's from a known source 
and hasn’t been modified since it was last signed. Before your app can
integrate app services, be installed on a device, or be submitted
to the App Store, it must be signed with a certificate issued by Apple.

## How to obtain Certificate?

A certificate can be obtained from certification authority companies.
Both Microsoft and Apple specify which companies are compatible with
its platform.

### Windows

Many certification authority companies provide a certification for code
signing for windows.

#### Certum Open Source developer certificate program

Certum(r) is one of certification authority services by Asseco Ltd.
They provide unique but only produce line for Open Source developers.

They provide a code signing certificate with discounted fee.
They check not only developer individual identities but also check OSS projects. 

#### Comodo certificate for individuals

Comodo provides a certification with affordable prices for individuals.


### macOS

#### Certificate issued by Apple

#### notarized by Apple


## Tools

### Windows

#### signtool.exe

`signtool.exe` is utility bundled with Windows SDK. 
SignTool is a command-line tool that digitally signs files, 
verifies the signatures in files, and time stamps files.

The tool is installed in the `\Bin` folder of the Microsoft Windows SDK installation path,
for example: `C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\bin\10.0.19041.0\x64\signtool.exe`.

You can learn it at

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/seccrypto/signtool

### Linux

#### osslsigntool

osslsigncode is a small tool that implements part of the functionality of 
the Microsoft tool signtool.exe - more exactly the Authenticode signing and timestamping. 
But osslsigncode is based on OpenSSL and cURL, and thus should be able to compile on most 
platforms where these exist.

https://github.com/mtrojnar/osslsigncode

#### OpenSC

OpenSC is Open source smart card tools and middleware.
It support PKCS#11/MiniDriver/Tokend.

#### openssl-pkcs11

```bash
$ sudo apt get install libengine-pkcs11-openssl 
```

You can check whether you can access to pkcs#11 Hardware security module.

```bash
$ openssl engine -vvv -tt pkcs11 
(pkcs11) pkcs11 engine
     [ available ]
     SO_PATH: Specifies the path to the 'pkcs11' engine shared library
          (input flags): STRING
     MODULE_PATH: Specifies the path to the PKCS#11 module shared library
          (input flags): STRING
     PIN: Specifies the pin code
          (input flags): STRING
     VERBOSE: Print additional details
          (input flags): NO_INPUT
     QUIET: Remove additional details
          (input flags): NO_INPUT
     INIT_ARGS: Specifies additional initialization arguments to the PKCS#11 module
          (input flags): STRING
     FORCE_LOGIN: Force login to the PKCS#11 module
          (input flags): NO_INPUT
40772F50F97F0000:error:1280006A:DSO support routines:dlfcn_bind_func:could not bind to the requested symbol name:../crypto/dso/dso_dlfcn.c:188:symname(EVP_PKEY_base_id): /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/engines-3/pkcs11.so: undefined symbol: EVP_PKEY_base_id
40772F50F97F0000:error:1280006A:DSO support routines:DSO_bind_func:could not bind to the requested symbol name:../crypto/dso/dso_lib.c:176:
```

### macOS
